tree-sitter post (#1281)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2026-04-09-treesitter/index.Rmd

---
title: A better R programming experience thanks to tree-sitter
author: 
- Maëlle Salmon
editor: 
date: '2026-03-26'
slug: tree-sitter-overview
description: Modern tooling for parsing, searching, formatting, editing R code, just like for other programming languages.
tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes
  - best practice
params:
  doi: "10.59350/57mzc-7e212"
output: hugodown::md_document
---

A little bit less than two years ago, building on work by Jim Hester and Kevin Ushey, Davis Vaughan completed a very impactful JSON file for the R community:
an R grammar for the tree-sitter parsing generator.
He even got a round of applause for it during a talk at the useR! 2024 conference!
So, did he get cheered for... JSON? :sweat_smile:
No, the audience got excited about the _improved developer experience for R_ that this file unlocked. 
In this post, we'll explain what tree-sitter is, and what tools built upon it can bring to your workflow writing R software.

## Code parsing: what is tree-sitter

> [Tree-sitter](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tree-sitter_(parser_generator)) is a code [parsing generator](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/) with bindings existing in several languages including Rust (and R!). 

Reviewer: Why not just link to the official page?

> It is written in C, the CLI is written in Rust, parsers are generated from JSON files [using Node](https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter/blob/master/docs/src/6-contributing.md).

Reviewer: I'm not sure those details are interesting, maybe just mention it's written in C with bindings in various languages

Let's rewind a little bit.
What does it mean to parse code?

Basically, given a string of code like

```r
a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)
```

How do you know that `mean` is a function name, `na.rm` an argument name, `TRUE` a logical?
You have to _parse_ that code into what's called a parse tree.
You do that in your head when reading R code. :smile_cat:

R itself can obviously parse R code, you can use `parse()` and `getParseData()` to reproduce that behavior.

```{r}
parse(
  text = "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)",
  keep.source = TRUE
) |>
  getParseData()
```

Or you could transform that same data into XML using Gábor Csárdi's [{xmlparsedata}](https://r-lib.github.io/xmlparsedata/):

```{r}
parse(
  text = "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)",
  keep.source = TRUE
) |>
  xmlparsedata::xml_parse_data(pretty = TRUE) |>
  xml2::read_xml() |>
  as.character() |>
  cat()
```

In both cases, you recognize words such as `LEFT_ASSIGN` or `SYMBOL_FUNCTION_CALL`.
Parsing is useful to execute code if you're R,

> and otherwise to analyse code (does it call such and such function? and this without your own brittle regular expressions), to navigate it (going from a function call to the definition of that function), to modify it (replacing all occurrences of a function with another one).

Reviewer: Just a suggestion:

> Parsing is an essential step before the code is actually executed, but parsed code can also be used for other purposes, such as ...

> Now, tree-sitter allows such code parsing but **faster** especially thanks to its support of incremental parsing -- updating the syntax tree as you are typing in your editor for instance!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, tree-sitter allows such code parsing but **faster** especially thanks to its support of incremental parsing -- which is key to update the syntax tree as you are typing in your editor for instance!
```

Tree-sitter is agnostic in that it can parse any code as long as it gets the Rosetta stone for it. 
It's been used for many languages which means many tools have been built around it.

To make tree-sitter "learn" a new language you need to give it JSON containing the definition of the syntax of that language,
what's called a _grammar_.
This is where the aforementioned JSON file by Davis Vaughan and collaborators comes into play!

> Treesitter.r, that provides the R grammar, is key to all tools presented in this post that use R code as their input. 

Reviewer: Following the previous comment on the grammar, this needs to be adapted a bit: AFAIK `tree-sitter-r` rewrites the R grammar in the format required by tree-sitter, but it doesn't write the R grammar from scratch. Instead it uses the existing R grammar as a reference (and this is also why there are some bugs in `tree-sitter-r` where some code is not correctly parsed).

The grammar is [data](https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/main/src/grammar.json) that can be used by other tools, not only R packages, even if the grammar is among other things shared as an R package called {treesitter.r}.

Here's how to use the {treesitter} R package for the same code.

```{r}
library(treesitter)
language <- treesitter.r::language()
parser <- parser(language)
text <- "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)"
parser_parse(parser, text)
```

## Browsing code interactively: Positron IDE, GitHub

The real reason why the audience applauded Davis Vaughan is that he explained how the R grammar for tree-sitter had been [deployed to GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) so that we get almost as good browsing experience browsing R code on GitHub than browsing, say, JS code.
If we search for a function name in a repository for instance, its definition will be indicated in the search results.
See [Davis' slides](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gm0ikRBAfwc).

Also very useful is the use of tree-sitter by [Ark](https://github.com/posit-dev/ark), 
the R kernel used in the Positron IDE.

> Tree-sitter, with its R grammar, is how in Positron you can click on a function to get to its definition, how you get help on hover, etc.

Reviewer: I'm not 100% sure about that. It might be the case but if it were then I guess you should be able to ctrl+click on the function to go to its definition without an active R session, which isn't the case.

Author: I'll research this and change the example for now.

Another use case of the {treesitter} R package is the {igraph.r2cdocs} [extension](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/dev/articles/extending.html) to {roxygen2} for the {igraph} package,
that [parses all of igraph R code](https://github.com/igraph/igraph.r2cdocs/blob/6be2a327a18deb823302caeab8b60a916f6fac62/R/roxygen.R#L119) to then be able to identify, 
for each exported function, whether it (in)directly calls a function whose name ends with `_impl`, 
indicating a wrapper to a C igraph function whose docs can be then be linked from the manual of the R function.

[ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/) is an useful tool built on top of tree-sitter, for searching and re-writing code, with an easier query syntax than tree-sitter's.
Its name reminds of grep, but with ast-grep we do not need to write brittle regular expressions. :smile_cat:

[{astgrepr}](https://astgrepr.etiennebacher.com/) by Etienne Bacher is an R wrapper to the Rust bindings of ast-grep.
It is in particular used in Etienne's [{flir} package](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/) for [refactoring](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/articles/adding_rules) code.

> The ast-grep CLI itself is featured in an useful [blog post by Emil Hvitfeldt](https://emilhvitfeldt.com/post/ast-grep-r-claude-code/) where he explains how to document the usage of ast-grep for Claude.

Reviewer: Put CLI in full words once?

## Formatting and linting: Air, Jarl

Speaking of CLIs...

```{=html}
{{< figure src="meme.png" alt="Cute kitten attacked by robots. The text says 'Everytime you use Claude for something a CLI can do, a kitten dies'." >}}
```

[Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html), by Davis Vaughan and Lionel Henry, is a CLI built on tree-sitter, in Rust.
It _reformats_ code blazingly fast.

[Jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/), by Etienne Bacher, is a CLI built on Air, therefore also on tree-sitter, in Rust.
It _lints_ and _fixes_ code, also blazingly fast.
It can even detect [unreachable code](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/unreachable_code), [unused functions](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/unused_function) and [duplicated function definitions](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/duplicated_function_definition).

For both these examples, the creation of _CLIs_ wrapping Rust bindings is more efficient than the creation of R packages wrapping the treesitter R package, for several reasons:

- the Rust CLIs can edit code very fast;
- the CLI are integrated in extensions for popular IDEs (for instance Positron);

> - a CLI is easier to install on CI than an R package that needs, well, an R installation.

Reviewer: Not sure this is worth keeping, but if you do you can also mention that it's quite easy to make this kind of Rust code run in parallel, and more generally it's a lower level language than R so it just has less overhead.

## More tools

> A honorable mention for these tools we've explored a bit less.

Reviewer: "A" -> "An" I think?

Also, "honorable" feels a bit diminishing.

### Configuring: {ts} for parsing JSON and TOML

The [{ts}](https://github.com/r-lib/ts) package by Gábor Csárdi is the backbone of two packages useful for editing and manipulating, from R:

- TOML ([{tstoml}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tstoml/));
- JSON ([{tsjson}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tsjsonc/)).

Compared to existing parsers in R for those formats, these two packages preserve comments.

### Testing code: {muttest}

[Mutation testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutation_testing) is a kind of testing where you, say, randomly swap `+` with `-` in your code (you _mutate_ it) and you run your tests to see whether they catch the mutant.
The [{muttest} package{](https://github.com/jakubsob/muttest) is an R package for mutation testing, that depends on the treesitter} R package.

### Diffing code: difftastic

The difftastic CLI is “a structural diff tool that understands syntax”. ✨ 

> This means that difftastic doesn’t only compare line or “words” but actual syntax by looking at lines around the lines that changed (by default, 3), Even better, R understanding is built-in so that’s one worry less.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that difftastic doesn’t only compare line or “words” but actual syntax by looking at lines around the lines that changed (by default, 3), Even better, it understands R out of the box.
```

Just a suggestion

TODO Link to my post? https://github.com/maelle/simplymaelle/pull/88

## Conclusion: more to come?

In this post, we've presented an overview of tree-sitter based tooling for R or in R.

```{=html}

> {{< figure src="tree-sitter.png" alt="Diagram of tree-sitter tooling for R. At the center is tree-sitter especially its Rust bindings. At the top is the input, R scripts, with an arrow allowed by the R grammar for treesitter. At the bottom from treesitter is the treesitter R package,; ast-grep that is used by astgrepr which is used by flir and that is used by the CLAUDE.md instructions for parsing code; Air that is used by Jarl; Ark that is used by the Positron IDE; R code browsing on GitHub." >}}

Reviewer: I'd put the grammar box in the same box as "treesitter (especially its Rust bindings)" because currently the grammar box isn't connected to anything and the treesitter is useless without the associated grammars. Or maybe put a box that contains two boxes, the grammar and "treesitter", and then the arrows start from this big box?		

Also the astregpr and flir boxes are too big?

tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes
  - best practice
params:
  doi: "10.59350/57mzc-7e212"
output: hugodown::md_document
---

A little bit less than two years ago, building on work by Jim Hester and Kevin Ushey, Davis Vaughan completed a very impactful JSON file for the R community:
an R grammar for the tree-sitter parsing generator.
He even got a round of applause for it during a talk at the useR! 2024 conference!
So, did he get cheered for... JSON? :sweat_smile:

No, the audience got excited about the _improved developer experience for R_ that this file unlocked. 
R tooling around tree-sitter is how you get 

- reformatting through [Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/) and linting through [Jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/);
- auto-completion or help on hover in the [Positron IDE](https://lionel-.github.io/slidedecks/2024-07-11-ark);
- better [search](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) for R on GitHub;
- ...

In this post, we'll explain what tree-sitter is, and what tools built upon it can bring to your workflow writing R software.

## Code parsing: what is tree-sitter

> [Tree-sitter](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/) is a code [parsing generator](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/) written in C, with bindings existing in several languages including Rust (and R!). 

Reviewer: linked twice in the same sentence

Here's how to use the {treesitter} R package for the same code.

```{r}
library(treesitter)
language <- treesitter.r::language()
parser <- parser(language)
text <- "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)"
parser_parse(parser, text)
```

Tree-sitter is the workhorse of many tools, that are mentioned in the diagram below.
All of them are dependent on tree-sitter and the R grammar provided to it.
Some of them are CLI, while others are R packages.

```{=html}
{{< figure src="tree-sitter.png" alt="Diagram of tree-sitter tooling for R. At the center is tree-sitter especially its Rust bindings and the R grammar for treesitter. At the top is the input, R scripts. At the bottom from treesitter is the treesitter R package,; ast-grep that is used by astgrepr which is used by flir and that is used by the CLAUDE.md instructions for parsing code; Air that is used by Jarl; Ark that is used by the Positron IDE; R code browsing on GitHub." >}}
```

Let's dive into these tools in more details!

## Browsing code interactively: Positron IDE, GitHub

> The real reason why the audience applauded Davis Vaughan is that he explained how the R grammar for tree-sitter had been [deployed to GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) so that we get almost as good browsing experience browsing R code on GitHub than browsing, say, JS code.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The real reason why the audience applauded Davis Vaughan is that he explained how the R grammar for tree-sitter had been [deployed to GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) so that we get almost as good experience browsing R code on GitHub as browsing, say, JS code.
```

Reviewer: Also, "browsing" appears three times in the sentence

Other development environments such as [Emacs](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2022-11/msg01443.html) have support for tree-sitter.

## Searching/browsing code: {treesitter}, ast-grep

You can parse and search R code using the {treesitter} R package and [treesitter query syntax](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/4-code-navigation.html).
The {treesitter} R package is a dependency of the [{gander} package](https://simonpcouch.github.io/gander/) by Simon Couch, 
that is meant to be used for a better experience with LLMs when writing R code.
Another use case of the {treesitter} R package is the {igraph.r2cdocs} [extension](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/dev/articles/extending.html) to {roxygen2} for the {igraph} package,
that [parses all of igraph R code](https://github.com/igraph/igraph.r2cdocs/blob/6be2a327a18deb823302caeab8b60a916f6fac62/R/roxygen.R#L119) to then be able to identify, 
for each exported function, whether it (in)directly calls a function whose name ends with `_impl`, 
indicating a wrapper to a C igraph function whose docs can be then be linked from the manual of the R function.

> [ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/) is an useful tool built on top of tree-sitter, for searching and re-writing code, with an clearer query syntax than tree-sitter's.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/) is a useful tool built on top of tree-sitter, for searching and re-writing code, with a clearer query syntax than tree-sitter's.
```
I think "a useful" is an exception

Author: oh write I always forget... because it sounds like a consonant. Thank you!!

Its name reminds of grep, but with ast-grep we do not need to write brittle regular expressions. :smile_cat:[{astgrepr}](https://astgrepr.etiennebacher.com/) by Etienne Bacher is an R wrapper to the Rust bindings of ast-grep.
It is in particular used in Etienne's [{flir} package](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/) for [refactoring](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/articles/adding_rules) code.

> The ast-grep command-line interface (CLI) itself is featured in an useful [blog post by Emil Hvitfeldt](https://emilhvitfeldt.com/post/ast-grep-r-claude-code/) where he explains how to document the usage of ast-grep for Claude.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ast-grep command-line interface (CLI) itself is featured in a useful [blog post by Emil Hvitfeldt](https://emilhvitfeldt.com/post/ast-grep-r-claude-code/) where he explains how to document the usage of ast-grep for Claude.
```

Speaking of CLIs...

```{=html}
{{< figure src="meme.png" alt="Cute kitten attacked by robots. The text says 'Everytime you use Claude for something a CLI can do, a kitten dies'." >}}
```

[Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html), by Davis Vaughan and Lionel Henry, is a CLI built on tree-sitter, in Rust.
It _reformats_ code blazingly fast.

[Jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/), by Etienne Bacher, is a CLI built on Air, therefore also on tree-sitter, in Rust.
It _lints_ and _fixes_ code, also blazingly fast.
It can even detect [unreachable code](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/unreachable_code), [unused functions](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/unused_function) and [duplicated function definitions](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/duplicated_function_definition).

For both these examples, the creation of _CLIs_ wrapping Rust bindings is more efficient than the creation of R packages wrapping the treesitter R package, for several reasons:

- the Rust CLIs can edit code very fast[^rust];
- the CLI are integrated in extensions for popular IDEs (for instance Positron);
- a CLI is easier to install on CI than an R package that needs, well, an R installation.

> [^rust]: Rust is a lower level language than R so has less overhead; furthermore this kind of Rust code can be parallelized easily.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^rust]: Rust is a lower level language than R so has less overhead; furthermore this kind of Rust code can be easily parallelized.
```

## More tools

A brief mention of some other interesting tools we've explored a bit less.

### Configuring: {ts} for parsing JSON and TOML (not R!)

The [{ts}](https://github.com/r-lib/ts) package by Gábor Csárdi is the backbone of two packages useful for editing and manipulating, from R:

- TOML ([{tstoml}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tstoml/));
- JSON ([{tsjson}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tsjsonc/)).

Compared to existing parsers in R for those formats, these two packages preserve comments.

### Testing code: {muttest}

[Mutation testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutation_testing) is a kind of testing where you, say, randomly swap `+` with `-` in your code (you _mutate_ it) and you run your tests to see whether they catch the mutant.
The [{muttest} package](https://github.com/jakubsob/muttest) is an R package for mutation testing, that depends on the {treesitter} R package.

### Diffing code: difftastic

The difftastic CLI is “a structural diff tool that understands syntax”. ✨ 

> This means that difftastic doesn’t only compare line or “words” but actual syntax by looking at lines around the lines that changed (by default, 3), Even better, it understands R out of the box.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that difftastic doesn’t only compare line or “words” but actual syntax by looking at lines around the lines that changed (by default, 3). Even better, it understands R out of the box.
```

---

> title: A better R programming experience thanks to tree-sitter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: A Better R Programming Experience Thanks to Tree-sitter
```

author: 
- Maëlle Salmon
editor: 
- Etienne Bacher
- Davis Vaughan
- Steffi LaZerte

> date: '2026-03-26'

Reviewer 2: Fix date here adn in folder name

slug: tree-sitter-overview
description: Modern tooling for parsing, searching, formatting, editing R code, just like for other programming languages.
tags:
  - package development
  - tech notes
  - best practice
params:
  doi: "10.59350/57mzc-7e212"
output: hugodown::md_document
---

A little bit less than two years ago, building on work by Jim Hester and Kevin Ushey, Davis Vaughan completed a very impactful JavaScript file for the R community:

> an R grammar for the tree-sitter parsing generator.

Reviewer 2: I think it's Tree-sitter rather than tree-sitter: 

<img width="1500" height="140" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/95a24b52-40ea-40ed-ab45-50f25eaea0bc" />

```suggestion
an R grammar for the Tree-sitter parsing generator.
```

He even got a round of applause for it during a talk at the useR! 2024 conference!
So, did he get cheered for... grammatical rules in a [JavaScript file](https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r/blob/next/grammar.js)? :sweat_smile:

No, the audience got excited about the _improved developer experience for R_ that this file unlocked. 

> R tooling around tree-sitter is how you get 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
No, the audience was excited about the _improved developer experience for R_ that this file unlocked. 
R tooling around Tree-sitter is how you get 
```

- reformatting through [Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/) and linting through [Jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/);
- auto-completion or help on hover in the [Positron IDE](https://lionel-.github.io/slidedecks/2024-07-11-ark);
- better [search](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) for R on GitHub;

> - ...

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- and more!
```

> In this post, we'll explain what tree-sitter is, and what tools built upon it can bring to your workflow writing R software.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this post, we'll explain what Tree-sitter is, and how tools built on Tree-sitter can benefit your R development workflow.
```

> ## Code parsing: what is tree-sitter

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Code parsing: what is Tree-sitter?
```

```

How do you know that `mean` is a function name, `na.rm` an argument name, `TRUE` a logical?
You have to _parse_ that code into what's called a parse tree.
You do that in your head when reading R code. :smile_cat:

R itself can obviously parse R code, 
thanks to its [grammar](https://github.com/wch/r-source/blob/trunk/src/main/gram.y).
See for instance the [commit that introduced R's native pipe](https://github.com/wch/r-source/commit/a1425adea54bcc98eef86081522b5dbb3e149cdc#diff-ba804d7fa3fa053c1f57d46369f4432cb55c9c4f69f46ae6510d0d1fcc59f382), 
which necessitated extending R's syntax thus modifying its grammar.

You can use `parse()` and `getParseData()` to parse R code.

```{r}
parse(
  text = "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)",
  keep.source = TRUE
) |>
  getParseData()
```

Or you could transform that same data into XML using Gábor Csárdi's [{xmlparsedata}](https://r-lib.github.io/xmlparsedata/):

```{r}
parse(
  text = "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)",
  keep.source = TRUE
) |>
  xmlparsedata::xml_parse_data(pretty = TRUE) |>
  xml2::read_xml() |>
  as.character() |>
  cat()
```

In both cases, you recognize words such as `LEFT_ASSIGN` or `SYMBOL_FUNCTION_CALL`.

> Parsing is an essential step before the code is actually executed, but parsed code can also be used for other purposes, such as analyzing code (does it call such and such [function](https://nrennie.rbind.io/blog/how-to-make-your-own-rstats-wrapped/)? and this without your own brittle regular expressions), navigating code (going from a function call to the definition of that function), modifying code (replacing all occurrences of a function with another one).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Parsing is an essential step before the code is actually executed, but parsed code can also be used for other purposes, such as analyzing code without brittle regular expressions (does it call a particular [function](https://nrennie.rbind.io/blog/how-to-make-your-own-rstats-wrapped/)?), navigating code (going from a function call to the definition of that function), or modifying code (replacing all occurrences of a function with another one).
```

> Now, tree-sitter allows such code parsing but **faster** especially thanks to its support of incremental parsing -- which is key to update the syntax tree as you are typing in your editor for instance!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, Tree-sitter performs this same code parsing but **faster** especially thanks to its support of incremental parsing -- which is key to updating the syntax tree as you are typing in your editor for instance!
```

Tree-sitter is agnostic in that it can parse any code as long as there is a grammar for it (think, Rosetta Stone plugins). 
It's been used for many languages which means many tools have been built around it.

> To make tree-sitter "learn" a new language you need to give it a file containing the definition of the syntax of that language,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To have Tree-sitter "learn" a new language you need to give it a file containing the definition of the syntax of that language,
```

what's called a _grammar_.
This is where the aforementioned JavaScript file by Davis Vaughan and collaborators comes into play!

> The treesitter-r repo, which provides a translation of the R grammar in the format expected by tree-sitter, is key to all tools presented in this post that use R code as their input. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [treesitter-r repo](https://github.com/r-lib/tree-sitter-r), which provides a translation of the R grammar in the format expected by Tree-sitter, is the base of all tools presented in this post which use R code as their input. 
```

> The JavaScript file, when run through tree-sitter at the command line, outputs different files including one called `parser.c` which gets linked in to tools like the R package for treesitter.r.

Reviewer 2: Unless you explain why parser.c is important, I think I would omit this sentence

> The JavaScript file, when run through tree-sitter at the command line, outputs different files including one called `parser.c` which gets linked in to tools like the R package for treesitter.r.

Reviewer 2: What is treesitter.r?
```suggestion
The JavaScript file, when run through Tree-sitter at the command line, outputs different files including one called `parser.c` which gets linked in to tools like the R package for treesitter.r.
```

> The JavaScript file, when run through tree-sitter at the command line, outputs different files including one called `parser.c` which gets linked in to tools like the R package for treesitter.r.

Author: ```suggestion
```

Here's how to use the {treesitter} R package for the same code as earlier.

```{r}
library(treesitter)
language <- treesitter.r::language()
parser <- parser(language)
text <- "a <- mean(x, na.rm = TRUE)"
parser_parse(parser, text)
```

Tree-sitter is the workhorse of many tools, that are mentioned in the diagram below.
All of them are dependent on tree-sitter and the R grammar provided to it.

> Some of them are CLI, while others are R packages.

Reviewer 2: Define CLI?

> Some of them are CLI, while others are R packages.

Reviewer 2: I suggest moving this last sentence to above the figure so it doesn't get lost.

```suggestion
Tree-sitter is the workhorse of many tools (see diagram below).
All of these tools are dependent on Tree-sitter and the R grammar provided.
Some of them are CLI, while others are {R packages}.

Let's dive into these tools in more details!
```

> Some of them are CLI, while others are R packages.

Author: ```suggestion
Some of them are command-line interfaces (CLIs), while others are R packages.
```

```{=html}

> {{< figure src="tree-sitter.png" alt="Diagram of tree-sitter tooling for R. At the center is tree-sitter especially its Rust bindings and the R grammar for treesitter. At the top is the input, R scripts. At the bottom from treesitter is the treesitter R package,; ast-grep that is used by astgrepr which is used by flir and that is used by the CLAUDE.md instructions for parsing code; Air that is used by Jarl; Ark that is used by the Positron IDE; R code browsing on GitHub." >}}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{{< figure src="tree-sitter.png" alt="Diagram of Tree-sitter tooling for R. At the center is Tree-sitter especially its Rust bindings and the R grammar for treesitter. At the top is the input, R scripts. At the bottom from treesitter is the treesitter R package,; ast-grep that is used by astgrepr which is used by flir and that is used by the CLAUDE.md instructions for parsing code; Air that is used by Jarl; Ark that is used by the Positron IDE; R code browsing on GitHub." >}}
```

```

> Let's dive into these tools in more details!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

## Browsing code interactively: Positron IDE, GitHub

> The real reason why the audience applauded Davis Vaughan is that he explained how the R grammar for tree-sitter had been [deployed to GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) so that we get almost as good experience browsing R code on GitHub as browsing, say, JS code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The real reason why the audience applauded Davis Vaughan is that he explained how the R grammar for Tree-sitter had been [deployed to GitHub](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/120397) so that we get almost as good experience browsing R code on GitHub as browsing, say, JS code.
```

If we search for a function name in a repository for instance, its definition will be indicated in the search results.
See [Davis' slides](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gm0ikRBAfwc) (also available in [PDF](https://github.com/DavisVaughan/2024-07-09_useR-2024)), 
or refer to the video below showing how typing `vetiver_model` in the search bar from the R vetiver repo makes the function definition the first result, on which one can click to land into the definition.

```{=html}
{{< video src="searching-for-vetiver-model-r-new" >}}
```

> Also very useful is the use of tree-sitter by [Ark](https://github.com/posit-dev/ark), 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Also very useful is the use of Tree-sitter by [Ark](https://github.com/posit-dev/ark), 
```

the R kernel [used in the Positron IDE](https://lionel-.github.io/slidedecks/2024-07-11-ark/#/language-server-protocol-1).
Ark is how in Positron you get autocompletion, help on hover, etc.

> The video below shows how in Positron you can extend the selection to further steps of a pipeline.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ark is how you get autocompletion and help on hover in Positron.
The video below shows how you can extend the selection to further steps of a pipeline in Positron.
```

```{=html}
{{< video src="expand-selection-2" >}}
```

> This use case of tree-sitter is also featured in [Davis' slides](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gm0ikRBAfwc).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This use case of Tree-sitter is also featured in [Davis' slides](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Gm0ikRBAfwc).
```

See also Lionel Henry's and Davis Vaughan's talk about Ark at [posit conf 2024](https://youtu.be/8uRcB34Hhsw?si=UeWqIi9PtEOWqRsp&t=2109), especially the part about [code assistance](https://youtu.be/8uRcB34Hhsw?si=GBqntC6tW7D2WhBN&t=2455).

> Other development environments such as [Emacs](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2022-11/msg01443.html) have support for tree-sitter.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Other development environments such as [Emacs](https://lists.gnu.org/archive/html/emacs-devel/2022-11/msg01443.html) also have support for Tree-sitter.
```

> ## Searching/browsing code: {treesitter}, tree-sitter, ast-grep

Reviewer 2: Perhaps I misunderstoood, but this heading seems to only mention a few of the topics covered? Perhaps omit the specifics?

```suggestion
## Searching/browsing code
```

You can parse and search R code using the {treesitter} R package and [treesitter query syntax](https://tree-sitter.github.io/tree-sitter/4-code-navigation.html).
The {treesitter} R package is a dependency of the [{gander} package](https://simonpcouch.github.io/gander/) by Simon Couch, 
that is meant to be used for a better experience with LLMs when writing R code.
Another use case of the {treesitter} R package is the {igraph.r2cdocs} [extension](https://roxygen2.r-lib.org/dev/articles/extending.html) to {roxygen2} for the {igraph} package,
that [parses all of igraph R code](https://github.com/igraph/igraph.r2cdocs/blob/6be2a327a18deb823302caeab8b60a916f6fac62/R/roxygen.R#L119) to then be able to identify, 
for each exported function, whether it (in)directly calls a function whose name ends with `_impl`, 
indicating a wrapper to a C igraph function whose docs can be then be linked from the manual of the R function.

> The {pkgdepends} package calls tree-sitter ([C](https://github.com/r-lib/pkgdepends/blob/main/src/tree-sitter.c)) to detect [dependencies in files](https://github.com/r-lib/pkgdepends/blob/634661a7d91b41476fd1ab653fe3087a6e40b8a9/R/scan-deps.R#L340).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The {pkgdepends} package calls Tree-sitter ([C](https://github.com/r-lib/pkgdepends/blob/main/src/tree-sitter.c)) to detect [dependencies in files](https://github.com/r-lib/pkgdepends/blob/634661a7d91b41476fd1ab653fe3087a6e40b8a9/R/scan-deps.R#L340).
```

Below we run it on the source of the [saperlipopette R package](https://docs.ropensci.org/saperlipopette/).

```{r}
pkgdepends::scan_deps(
  "../../../../../CHAMPIONS/saperlipopette",
  "../../../../../CHAMPIONS"
)
```

[ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/) is a useful tool built on top of tree-sitter, for searching and re-writing code, with a clearer query syntax than tree-sitter's.
Its name reminds of grep, but with ast-grep we do not need to write brittle regular expressions. :smile_cat:[{astgrepr}](https://astgrepr.etiennebacher.com/) by Etienne Bacher is an R wrapper to the Rust bindings of ast-grep.

> It is in particular used in Etienne's [{flir} package](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/) for [refactoring](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/articles/adding_rules) code.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[ast-grep](https://ast-grep.github.io/) is a useful tool built on Tree-sitter for searching and re-writing code, with a clearer query syntax than Tree-sitter's.
Its name is reminiscent of grep, but with ast-grep we do not need to write brittle regular expressions :smile_cat:. [{astgrepr}](https://astgrepr.etiennebacher.com/) by Etienne Bacher is an R wrapper to the Rust bindings of ast-grep, and is used in Etienne's [{flir} package](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/) for [refactoring](https://flir.etiennebacher.com/articles/adding_rules) code.
```

The ast-grep command-line interface (CLI) itself is featured in a useful [blog post by Emil Hvitfeldt](https://emilhvitfeldt.com/post/ast-grep-r-claude-code/) where he explains how to document the usage of ast-grep for Claude.

## Formatting and linting: Air, Jarl

Speaking of CLIs...

```{=html}
{{< figure src="meme.png" alt="Cute kitten attacked by robots. The text says 'Everytime you use Claude for something a CLI can do, a kitten dies'." >}}
```

> [Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html), by Davis Vaughan and Lionel Henry, is a CLI built on tree-sitter, in Rust.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Air](https://posit-dev.github.io/air/cli.html), by Davis Vaughan and Lionel Henry, is a CLI built on Tree-sitter, in Rust.
```

It _reformats_ code blazingly fast.

> [Jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/), by Etienne Bacher, is a CLI built on Air, therefore also on tree-sitter, in Rust.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Jarl](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/), by Etienne Bacher, is a CLI built on Air, therefore also on Tree-sitter, in Rust.
```

It _lints_ and _fixes_ code, also blazingly fast.
It can even detect [unreachable code](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/unreachable_code), [unused functions](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/unused_function) and [duplicated function definitions](https://jarl.etiennebacher.com/rules/duplicated_function_definition).

> For both these examples, the creation of _CLIs_ wrapping Rust bindings is more efficient than the creation of R packages wrapping the treesitter R package, for several reasons:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In both of these examples, the creation of _CLIs_ wrapping Rust bindings was more efficient than the creation of R packages wrapping the {treesitter} R package, for several reasons:
```

- the Rust CLIs can edit code very fast[^rust];

> - the CLI are integrated in extensions for popular IDEs (for instance Positron);

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Rust CLIs can edit code very fast[^rust];
- CLIs are integrated in extensions for popular IDEs (for instance Positron);
```

- a CLI is easier to install on CI than an R package that needs, well, an R installation.

[^rust]: Rust is a lower level language than R so has less overhead; furthermore this kind of Rust code can be easily parallelized.

## More tools

A brief mention of some other interesting tools we've explored a bit less.

### Configuring: {ts} for parsing JSON and TOML (not R!)

> The [{ts}](https://github.com/r-lib/ts) package by Gábor Csárdi is the backbone of two packages useful for editing and manipulating, from R:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The [{ts}](https://github.com/r-lib/ts) package by Gábor Csárdi is the backbone of two R packages used for editing and manipulating:
```

- TOML ([{tstoml}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tstoml/));

> - JSON ([{tsjson}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tsjsonc/)).

Reviewer 2: So many brackets 🙀 
```suggestion
- TOML [{tstoml}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tstoml/);
- JSON [{tsjson}](https://gaborcsardi.github.io/tsjsonc/).
```

Compared to existing parsers in R for those formats, these two packages preserve comments.

### Testing code: {muttest}

[Mutation testing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Mutation_testing) is a kind of testing where you, say, randomly swap `+` with `-` in your code (you _mutate_ it) and you run your tests to see whether they catch the mutant.
The [{muttest} package](https://github.com/jakubsob/muttest) by Jakub Sobolewski is an R package for mutation testing, that depends on the {treesitter} R package.

### Diffing code: difftastic

The difftastic CLI by Wilfred Hughes is “a structural diff tool that understands syntax”. ✨ 
This means that difftastic doesn’t only compare line or “words” but actual syntax by looking at lines around the lines that changed (by default, 3). Even better, it understands R out of the box.
See this [blog post with examples of R code diffing](https://masalmon.eu/2026/03/30/difftastic/).

## Conclusion: more to come?

> In this post, we've presented an overview of tree-sitter based tooling for R or in R.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this post, we've presented an overview of Tree-sitter based tooling for R or in R.
```

Note that this ecosystem of tools is very actively developed, so some tools might come and go.
However, the idea that plugging the R grammar into a general parsing generator brings cool features to us R developers, will remain true.

> Maybe _you_ will contribute to this ecosystem, either in an existing tool or by creating a new one?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Maybe _you_ will contribute to this ecosystem, either through an existing tool or by creating a new one?
```
